.TH CANTIL 1 "June 2026" "Cantil" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
cantil \- host client for the Cantil hardware certificate authority
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cantil
.B list
.PP
.B cantil
.B pair
[\fB\-\-force\fR]
[\fB\-\-passkey\fR \fIdigits\fR]
[\fB\-\-client\-cert\fR \fIfile\fR [\fB\-\-client\-chain\fR \fIfile\fR]]
.I port
.PP
.B cantil
.B status
[\fIopts\fR]
.I port
.PP
.B cantil
.B random
.I n
[\fIopts\fR]
.I port
.PP
.B cantil
.B provision\-ca
[\fB\-\-new\fR]
\fB\-\-cn\fR \fIcn\fR
[\fB\-\-o\fR \fIorg\fR]
[\fB\-\-ou\fR \fIou\fR]
[\fB\-\-c\fR \fIcc\fR]
[\fB\-\-st\fR \fIstate\fR]
[\fB\-\-l\fR \fIlocality\fR]
[\fB\-\-validity\fR \fIdays\fR]
[\fB\-\-path\-len\fR \fIn\fR]
[\fIopts\fR]
.I port
.PP
.B cantil
.B sign\-key\-slot
.I issuer_slot
.I subject_slot
[\fIopts\fR]
.I port
.PP
.B cantil
.B protect
.I slot
[\fB\-\-certs\fR]
[\fIopts\fR]
.I port
.PP
.B cantil
.B unprotect
.I slot
[\fIopts\fR]
.I port
.PP
.B cantil
.B key\-chain
.I slot
[\fIopts\fR]
.I port
.PP
.B cantil
.B sign\-csr\-slot
.I issuer_slot
.I csr.der
[\fIopts\fR]
.I port
.PP
.B cantil
.B session\-cert
[\fIopts\fR]
.I port
.PP
.B cantil
.B session\-csr
[\fIopts\fR]
.I port
.PP
.B cantil
.B ca\-cert
[\fIopts\fR]
.I port
.PP
.B cantil
.B session\-sign
.I issuer_slot
[\fB\-\-force\fR]
[\fIopts\fR]
.I port
.PP
.B cantil
.B session\-push
.I cert.der
[\fB\-\-chain\fR \fIchain.der\fR]
[\fB\-\-force\fR]
[\fIopts\fR]
.I port
.PP
.B cantil
.B clients
[\fIopts\fR]
.I port
.PP
.B cantil
.B unpair
.I hex\-pubkey
[\fIopts\fR]
.I port
.PP
.B cantil
.B name
.I hex\-pubkey
.I name
[\fIopts\fR]
.I port

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBcantil\fR manages a Cantil hardware certificate authority device over USB
CDC/ACM (or BLE NUS via
.B libcantil
directly).
All commands that take a
.I port
argument open an end-to-end encrypted
Noise_XX_25519_ChaChaPoly_SHA256 session to the device.  No keys leave the
device at any point.
.PP
Client identity keys are generated on first use and stored under
.IR ${XDG_CONFIG_HOME:-$HOME/.config}/cantil/ .
Run
.B cantil pair
on first contact with a new device to generate a client keypair and record the
device fingerprint for subsequent Tier-2 verification.

.SH COMMANDS
.SS General
.TP
.B list
Enumerate attached Cantil USB devices (VID:PID 0x1209:0x00CA) by walking
.IR /sys/bus/usb/devices .
Prints VID:PID, USB serial, protocol CDC/ACM port, and console CDC/ACM port for
each device found.  Does not require a prior
.BR pair .

.SS First-time setup
.TP
\fBpair\fR [\fB\-\-force\fR] [\fB\-\-passkey\fR \fIdigits\fR] [\fB\-\-client\-cert\fR \fIfile\fR [\fB\-\-client\-chain\fR \fIfile\fR]] \fIport\fR
Connect to the device at
.I port
using Trust-on-First-Use (Tier 1), record the device's static Noise public key
and the session certificate fingerprint, and perform a tap-confirm handshake on
the device.
.RS
.PP
On first run a fresh Curve25519 client keypair is generated and saved to the
key store.  The device's static public key, session certificate fingerprint, and
FICR-derived CN are recorded for use as the default Tier-2 trust policy on all
subsequent connections.
.PP
The device will blink cyan and wait for the owner to tap
.B Orange-Orange
(two taps, pause, two taps) to confirm the new bond.  The CLI blocks for up to
25 seconds.
.TP
.B \-\-force
Re-pair even when a device key is already stored; overwrites the existing bond.
.TP
\fB\-\-passkey\fR \fIdigits\fR
Supply the 6-digit passkey shown by the device (Method 3 devices only).
If omitted and the device expects a passkey, the CLI prompts interactively.
.TP
\fB\-\-client\-cert\fR \fIfile\fR
DER-encoded client identity certificate (Method 4/5 CA-anchored devices).
Saved to the key store for automatic use on subsequent connections.
.TP
\fB\-\-client\-chain\fR \fIfile\fR
Optional DER chain file (concatenated intermediates) to accompany
\fB\-\-client\-cert\fR.
.RE

.SS Device information
.TP
\fBstatus\fR [\fIopts\fR] \fIport\fR
Print device state (LOCKED/UNLOCKED), firmware version, key slot usage, cert
counts, flash free space, BLE bond count, external-flash presence, and the
device key fingerprint.

.TP
\fBrandom\fR \fIn\fR [\fIopts\fR] \fIport\fR
Read
.I n
bytes of hardware-TRNG randomness from the device and print them as hex.
.I n
must be between 1 and the compile-time limit (typically 256).

.SS CA hierarchy setup
.TP
\fBprovision\-ca\fR [\fB\-\-new\fR] \fB\-\-cn\fR \fIcn\fR [\fIdn-opts\fR] [\fIopts\fR] \fIport\fR
Provision a key slot as a CA by writing X.509 subject data to it
.RB ( PUSH_KEY_X509 ,
opcode 0x26).  Without
.BR \-\-new ,
targets slot 0 (the factory CA slot); with
.BR \-\-new ,
generates a fresh P-256 key in the next free slot.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-new
Generate a fresh key in the next free slot instead of using slot 0.
.TP
\fB\-\-cn\fR \fIcn\fR
Subject Common Name (required).
.TP
\fB\-\-o\fR \fIorg\fR
Subject Organisation.
.TP
\fB\-\-ou\fR \fIou\fR
Subject Organisational Unit.
.TP
\fB\-\-c\fR \fIcc\fR
Subject Country (2-letter ISO 3166-1 alpha-2).
.TP
\fB\-\-st\fR \fIstate\fR
Subject State or Province.
.TP
\fB\-\-l\fR \fIlocality\fR
Subject Locality.
.TP
\fB\-\-validity\fR \fIdays\fR
Certificate validity period in days (default: 3650).
.TP
\fB\-\-path\-len\fR \fIn\fR
Basic Constraints pathLenConstraint (\-1 = unconstrained, 0 = leaf-only CA,
n = up to n subordinate CAs below).
.RE

.TP
\fBsign\-key\-slot\fR \fIissuer_slot\fR \fIsubject_slot\fR [\fIopts\fR] \fIport\fR
Sign the certificate for
.I subject_slot
using the CA key in
.IR issuer_slot ,
entirely on-device
.RB ( SIGN_KEY_SLOT ,
opcode 0x25).  Both slots must exist; the device must be UNLOCKED.

.TP
\fBprotect\fR \fIslot\fR [\fB\-\-certs\fR] [\fIopts\fR] \fIport\fR
Mark
.I slot
as protected
.RB ( PROTECT_SLOT ,
opcode 0x28).  Protected slots cannot be overwritten or deleted.
Requires a tap-confirm gesture on the device (Purple \(mu 3).
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-certs
Also protect all existing and future certificates issued by this slot against
manual revocation.
.RE

.TP
\fBunprotect\fR \fIslot\fR [\fIopts\fR] \fIport\fR
Remove the protection flag from
.I slot
.RB ( UNPROTECT_SLOT ,
opcode 0x29).  Requires a tap-confirm gesture on the device (Purple \(mu 3).

.TP
\fBkey\-chain\fR \fIslot\fR [\fIopts\fR] \fIport\fR
Fetch the complete certificate chain for
.I slot
(leaf first) and print it as hex DER.
.RS
.PP
Example — decode with OpenSSL:
.PP
.nf
cantil key\-chain 1 /dev/ttyACM0 | xxd \-r \-p | \\
    openssl x509 \-inform DER \-text \-noout
.fi
.RE

.TP
\fBsign\-csr\-slot\fR \fIissuer_slot\fR \fIcsr.der\fR [\fIopts\fR] \fIport\fR
Sign an external PKCS#10 CSR with the CA key in
.I issuer_slot
.RB ( SIGN_CSR_SLOT ,
opcode 0x2A).  The resulting certificate DER is printed as hex.
.RS
.PP
Example — save to file:
.PP
.nf
cantil sign\-csr\-slot 1 codesign.csr.der /dev/ttyACM0 | \\
    xxd \-r \-p > codesign.der
.fi
.RE

.SS Session identity
These commands manage the device's transport-identity session certificate — the
X.509 cert that binds the device's FICR-derived serial to its Noise static key
and is delivered inside every encrypted handshake.

.TP
\fBsession\-cert\fR [\fIopts\fR] \fIport\fR
Fetch the current session certificate DER and print it as hex.
.RS
.PP
Example — inspect with OpenSSL:
.PP
.nf
cantil session\-cert /dev/ttyACM0 | xxd \-r \-p | \\
    openssl x509 \-inform DER \-text \-noout
.fi
.RE

.TP
\fBsession\-csr\fR [\fIopts\fR] \fIport\fR
Build and fetch a PKCS#10 CSR for the device session P-256 identity key.
Use this to have the session certificate signed by an external CA; the CSR
preserves the required X.509 extensions including the Noise X25519 binding.

.TP
\fBca\-cert\fR [\fIopts\fR] \fIport\fR
Fetch the CA certificate (slot 0) DER and print it as hex.

.TP
\fBsession\-sign\fR \fIissuer_slot\fR [\fB\-\-force\fR] [\fIopts\fR] \fIport\fR
Have the device CA-sign its own session certificate using the CA key in
.IR issuer_slot
.RB ( SIGN_SESSION_FROM_SLOT ,
opcode 0x62).  The device must be UNLOCKED; a tap-confirm gesture is required.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-force
Re-sign even if the session certificate is already CA-signed.
.RE

.TP
\fBsession\-push\fR \fIcert.der\fR [\fB\-\-chain\fR \fIchain.der\fR] [\fB\-\-force\fR] [\fIopts\fR] \fIport\fR
Install an externally-signed session certificate on the device
.RB ( PUSH_SESSION_CERT ,
opcode 0x63).  The device validates that the certificate's SPKI matches its
stored P-256 identity key, that the Noise X25519 binding extension matches its
Noise static key, and that the subject fields match the build constant.
A tap-confirm gesture is required.
.RS
.TP
\fB\-\-chain\fR \fIchain.der\fR
Concatenated DER intermediate chain to install alongside the leaf certificate.
.TP
.B \-\-force
Install even if a CA-signed session certificate is already present.
.RE

.SS Bond management
.TP
\fBclients\fR [\fIopts\fR] \fIport\fR
List all bonded clients stored on the device, including their Curve25519
public key (hex), kind (host / peer-device), creation timestamp, and friendly
name (if set).

.TP
\fBunpair\fR \fIhex\-pubkey\fR [\fIopts\fR] \fIport\fR
Remove the bond for the client identified by the 64-character hex Curve25519
public key
.RI ( hex\-pubkey ).
Requires a tap-confirm gesture on the device.

.TP
\fBname\fR \fIhex\-pubkey\fR \fIname\fR [\fIopts\fR] \fIport\fR
Set a friendly display name for the bonded client identified by
.IR hex\-pubkey .

.SH TRUST OPTIONS
These options are accepted by all commands except
.B list
and
.BR pair .

.TP
\fB\-\-trust\fR \fBnone\fR|\fBpin\fR|\fBca\fR|\fBca+cn\fR
Set the client-side trust tier for this connection.  The default is
.B pin
when a session fingerprint is stored (see
.BR pair ),
otherwise
.BR none .
.RS
.TP
.B none
Tier 1.  The Noise session is fully encrypted and mutually authenticated; the
device certificate is not inspected.  Appropriate for local testing where
device substitution is not a concern.
.TP
.B pin
Tier 2.  The SHA-256 fingerprint of the device session certificate leaf must
match the value stored by a prior
.BR "cantil pair" .
Best for single-user personal devices.
.TP
.B ca
Tier 3.  The device certificate chain must validate to a CA loaded via
\fB\-\-ca\-dir\fR or \fB\-\-ca\-cert\fR.
Suitable for team or fleet deployments where all devices share a common issuing
CA.
.TP
.B ca+cn
Tier 4.  Tier 3 plus the certificate leaf CN must match the value supplied
by \fB\-\-cn\fR or stored by a prior
.BR "cantil pair" .
Use in production fleets where per-device enforcement is required.
.RE

.TP
\fB\-\-ca\-dir\fR \fIpath\fR
Load all \fI*.der\fR files in \fIpath\fR as trust-store CA certificates
(Tier 3/4).

.TP
\fB\-\-ca\-cert\fR \fIfile\fR
Load a single DER-encoded CA certificate into the trust store (Tier 3/4).

.TP
\fB\-\-cn\fR \fIvalue\fR
Expected leaf CN for Tier 4.  Overrides the value stored by
.BR pair .

.TP
\fB\-\-client\-cert\fR \fIfile\fR
DER-encoded client certificate to present during the Noise handshake (Method 4/5
devices).  If omitted, the cert stored by a prior
.B "cantil pair \-\-client\-cert"
is used automatically.

.TP
\fB\-\-client\-chain\fR \fIfile\fR
Optional DER chain file to accompany \fB\-\-client\-cert\fR.

.SH TRUST TIERS
Cantil separates the encrypted transport layer (Noise_XX — always active) from
the certificate trust policy (client-controlled).  All four tiers provide full
ChaCha20-Poly1305 encryption and mutual Noise authentication; the tiers differ
only in what the client checks about the device certificate after the handshake.

.TS
allbox tab(|);
c c l
n n l.
Tier|CLI name|When to use
1|none|Local testing, native_sim, lab environments.
2|pin|Personal devices — TOFU fingerprint set by \fBpair\fR.
3|ca|Managed fleet — all devices share a CA cert.
4|ca+cn|Production fleet — per-device CN enforcement.
.TE

.SH PAIRING METHODS
The device-side pairing method is set at firmware build time via
.BR CANTIL_PAIRING_METHOD .
The release default is Method 2.

.TS
allbox tab(|);
c l l.
Method|Kconfig|Summary
0|PAIRING_PROMISCUOUS|Any client accepted. Dev-only.
1|PAIRING_TOFU|First client bonded silently.
2|PAIRING_TAP_CONFIRM|Bond requires tap-confirm on device. \fIRelease default.\fR
3|PAIRING_PASSKEY|6-digit passkey + tap-confirm.
4|PAIRING_CA_ANCHOR|Client cert validated against device CA slot.
5|PAIRING_CA_ANCHOR_PLUS_PASSKEY|Method 4 + Method 3.
.TE

.SH KEY STORE
\fBcantil\fR stores client-side state under
.IR ${XDG_CONFIG_HOME:-$HOME/.config}/cantil/ :

.TS
tab(|);
l l.
\fIclient_priv.bin\fR|Curve25519 client private key (mode 0600)
\fIclient_pub.bin\fR|Curve25519 client public key
\fIclient_cert.der\fR|Stored client certificate (written by \fBpair \-\-client\-cert\fR)
\fIclient_chain.der\fR|Stored client certificate chain (optional)
\fIdevices/<fp16>/\fR|Per-device subdirectory; \fIfp16\fR = SHA-256(device key)[0:8] hex
\fI  device_pub.bin\fR|Pinned device static Noise public key
\fI  session_fp.bin\fR|SHA-256 fingerprint of device session certificate leaf
\fI  session_cn.bin\fR|Leaf CN from device session certificate (Tier 4 default)
.TE

Multiple devices are supported automatically: pairing a second device creates
a new subdirectory without affecting the first device's stored data.
Each subsequent command auto-selects the correct subdirectory by connecting
with TOFU and matching the device's Noise static key.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Error (message written to stderr).

.SH EXAMPLES
.SS First-time setup
.nf
# Discover attached devices:
cantil list

# Pair with a device and store its fingerprint:
cantil pair /dev/ttyACM0

# Check device health:
cantil status /dev/ttyACM0
.fi

.SS CA hierarchy setup
.nf
# Unlock slot 0 (factory CA) and give it a proper subject:
cantil unprotect 0 /dev/ttyACM0
cantil provision\-ca \\
    \-\-cn "Acme ROOT CA 0" \-\-o Acme \-\-ou "Trust Chain" \\
    \-\-c US \-\-st California \-\-l "San Francisco" \\
    \-\-validity 7300 \-\-path\-len 1 \\
    /dev/ttyACM0

# Provision subordinate CA in a new slot:
cantil provision\-ca \-\-new \\
    \-\-cn "Acme Sub CA 0-1" \-\-o Acme \-\-ou "Trust Chain" \\
    \-\-c US \-\-st California \-\-l "San Francisco" \\
    \-\-validity 3650 \-\-path\-len 0 \\
    /dev/ttyACM0

# Sign sub CA (slot 1) with root CA (slot 0), then protect both:
cantil sign\-key\-slot 0 1 /dev/ttyACM0
cantil protect 0 /dev/ttyACM0
cantil protect 1 /dev/ttyACM0

# Export sub CA chain for distribution to clients:
cantil key\-chain 1 /dev/ttyACM0 | xxd \-r \-p > subca_chain.der

# Sign an external code-signing CSR:
cantil sign\-csr\-slot 1 codesign.csr.der /dev/ttyACM0 | \\
    xxd \-r \-p > codesign.der
.fi

.SS Session identity (transport cert)
.nf
# Sign the device's own session cert with its on-device CA:
cantil session\-sign 0 /dev/ttyACM0

# Fetch for out-of-band fingerprint verification:
cantil session\-cert /dev/ttyACM0 | xxd \-r \-p | \\
    openssl x509 \-inform DER \-fingerprint \-noout

# External CA: extract CSR, sign externally, push back:
cantil session\-csr /dev/ttyACM0 | xxd \-r \-p > device.csr
# ... sign device.csr with your CA ...
cantil session\-push device_signed.der \-\-chain ca.der /dev/ttyACM0
.fi

.SS Fleet connections (Tier 3)
.nf
# Connect to any device whose cert chains to the fleet CA:
cantil status \-\-trust ca \-\-ca\-cert fleet_ca.der /dev/ttyACM0

# Connect with per-device CN enforcement (Tier 4):
cantil status \-\-trust ca+cn \-\-ca\-cert fleet_ca.der /dev/ttyACM0
.fi

.SS Bond management
.nf
# List bonded clients on the device:
cantil clients /dev/ttyACM0

# Remove a specific bond (obtain hex pubkey from 'clients'):
cantil unpair <64-char-hex-pubkey> /dev/ttyACM0

# Give a bond a friendly name:
cantil name <64-char-hex-pubkey> "laptop-work" /dev/ttyACM0
.fi

.SH FILES
.TP
.I ${XDG_CONFIG_HOME:-$HOME/.config}/cantil/
Client key store directory.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR openssl (1),
.BR xxd (1)
.PP
Full documentation:
.BR docs/transport-security.md
(user guide),
.BR docs/reference/protocol-and-client.md
(CBOR wire protocol and libcantil API),
.BR libcantil/include/cantil.h
(public C API).

.SH BUGS
DER output is printed as hex without separators; pipe through
.B "xxd \-r \-p"
to obtain a binary DER file.
.PP
.B cantil list
requires Linux
.IR /sys/bus/usb/devices ;
not available on macOS or Windows.

.SH AUTHORS
Cantil project contributors.
